---
layout: page
title: "Overview"
permalink: /overview/
---

<!-- # Overview -->

Welcome to the NeuroAI Workshop! This workshop aims to bring together researchers and practitioners from the fields of neuroscience and artificial intelligence.

We are in an era of unprecedented advancement in artificial intelligence, driven by the remarkable progress in artificial neural networks (ANNs) over the past decade. The widespread adoption of these techniques across diverse domains, from language generation (e.g., GPT4o, Claude, Pi, etc) to machine vision (e.g., Sora, DALL-E, etc), highlights the rapid pace of innovation and their transformative impact. This momentum paves the way for exploring the intersections of artificial and natural intelligence – NeuroAI – which promises to unlock novel insights into biological neuronal function and drive the development of computationally less intensive artificial systems trained using small-data regimes.

This burgeoning NeuroAI field is anchored by four key research areas:


- **Neuro-inspired Computations:** This research focuses on developing hardware and algorithms inspired by the biological neuronal structure and function, such as spiking neural networks and Hebbian plasticity. Incorporating neuro-inspired mechanisms such as continual learning principles allows these systems to adapt and improve over time without requiring retraining from scratch, further enhancing their robustness and applicability in dynamic scenarios. For instance, recent advancements in neuromorphic computing, particularly the development of Intel’s Loihi chip, demonstrate the potential of spiking neural networks to improve the efficiency and capabilities of artificial systems. The Loihi chip mimics the brain’s neuronal architectures and synaptic plasticity mechanisms, enabling more efficient processing and learning in real-time environments.

- **Explainable AI in Neuroscience:** This research explores the integration of AI models with neuroscientific principles to enhance interpretability and explainability. For instance, the use of neural network architectures inspired by the human brain’s hierarchical processing can improve the interpretability of complex models by aligning them with known neural mechanisms. Techniques such as using neuro-symbolic AI, where symbolic reasoning is combined with neural networks, allow for the creation of models that can explain their reasoning in human-understandable terms. Additionally, methods like neural activity mapping and brain-inspired learning algorithms, such as those leveraging Hebbian learning principles, offer ways to trace AI decision paths back to their origins in the model’s structure.

- **Biological Intelligent Systems:** This research investigates emerging paradigms in biological intelligence systems such as synthetic biological intelligence and organoid intelligence, focusing on the integration of live biological systems and their inherent learning mechanisms into artificial systems. For instance, Cortical Labs has pioneered the development of hybrid systems where neurons grown on microelectrode arrays are interfaced with computational hardware. These systems harness in-vitro neurons to enhance our understanding of human brain learning processes and facilitate the development of synthetic systems. By leveraging the adaptability and efficiency of biological neurons, this approach redefines the boundaries between artificial and natural intelligence, opening new avenues for innovation in AI.

- **Predictive Coding and Active Inference:** Predictive coding and active inference are emerging paradigms in understanding brain function and enhancing AI systems by modeling how the brain predicts and interprets sensory input. Predictive coding posits that the brain continuously generates predictions about incoming sensory data and updates these predictions based on the difference between expected and actual input, known as prediction errors. This framework aligns with active inference, where the brain not only predicts sensory inputs but also acts to minimize the surprise or free energy associated with these predictions, effectively making perception and action two sides of the same coin. This approach has been exemplified in computational models that emulate how the brain processes visual information, leading to advancements in computer vision, autonomous systems, and object recognition. For instance, AI models based on predictive coding principles have been developed to improve visual recognition tasks by incorporating hierarchical prediction mechanisms similar to those observed in the visual cortex. Moreover, active inference models are being explored in robotics, where robots use prediction and action to navigate and interact with dynamic environments more effectively. By integrating these neuroscientific principles, AI systems can achieve more human-like processing capabilities, paving the way for more intuitive and adaptive technologies.

Our workshop aims to explore the intersections among these research areas and provide a platform for researchers to navigate the links between artificial and natural intelligence. Accordingly, we hope to use the workshop as a vehicle for delving deeper into this interdisciplinary landscape; evaluate progress toward a unified (computational) framework for natural intelligence and investigate its potential for artificial intelligence. Through discussions about the current research trajectories in neuroscience and AI, we seek to identify fundamental gaps and challenges, paving the way for novel insights and future directions.

